{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red40\green41\blue49;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c20784\c21569\c25098;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The data gathered for this study comprises semi-structured interviews with twelve employees of Vejle Municipality, spanning various roles across all six administrative divisions. The data collection process involved taking rough notes by hand during the interviews, followed by more refined digital notes afterwards. From these refined notes, I created two affinity diagrams: one by hand and the other with the assistance of GPT-4 through a carefully crafted prompt.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 The analysis in this report primarily utilises my hand-made affinity diagram, as it encompasses not only the insights gleaned from my notes but also the nuances of my experiences and observations within Vejle Municipality.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Out of the interviewees, the majority were familiar with the IT investment process: six indicated familiarity (including one who had helped create the process in her role as a digitalisation consultant), five were unfamiliar, and the final participant, who was also unfamiliar, deemed the process irrelevant to her work and was therefore excluded from the analysis.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Perception of IT investment process as impersonal or excessively bureaucratic\cb1 \
\cb3 My first interview was with Freja, a seasoned web manager from the Policy, Analysis & Communication department. During our discussion, Freja expressed strong opinions on the IT investment process, perceiving it as excessively bureaucratic and impersonal. With twenty years of experience working closely with the IT department, she felt confident in her ability to communicate directly with them when necessary, bypassing the formal process. Freja advocated for a more relationship-based approach, emphasising the importance of positive reinforcement over punishment.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Freja's perspective laid the groundwork for my research, as the issue of the IT investment process being seen as impersonal and bureaucratic recurred in subsequent interviews. Her experience and insights into the challenges of collaborating with the IT department were invaluable, and her close connection to the department provided a unique viewpoint that illuminated broader issues surrounding the process.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Lise, an administrative assistant in the Daycare department, acts as a vital bridge between the Administration Building and daycare workers, who have distinct needs due to their more practical roles. Lise expresses concern and dismay at the prospect of using a form to contact the IT department. She values her personal relationship with Jonas from IT, as he understands the unique context of daycare workers. Lise worries that submitting a form may result in losing "unspoken considerations" arising from the social and educational differences between the two groups.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 To alleviate these concerns, Lise suggests adding an option on the form to indicate if the case involves a target group struggling to adapt to technological changes. Another appealing solution she proposes is including a preferred IT department contact person on the form, ensuring that someone familiar with the specific context is involved.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Benefits of using the process: potential talking points\cb1 \
\cb3 Claus, a development manager at Vejle's Center for Special Education for Youth and Adults (CSV), finds the IT investment process helpful because it connects them with the right people, such as an architect who oversees the case, ensuring it is remembered and acted upon. Using the IT investment process also provides a clear line of communication when working decentralised, as is the case with CSV. It allows them to follow a case in the system and see which IT department members are involved and what they are doing. Claus appreciates the ability to intervene if he feels his needs has been misunderstood.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Potential for strengthened cooperation between IT and the rest of the organisation\cb1 \
\cb3 Emma, who has been working in the municipality for thirteen years and took over her current position as an Implementation Consultant in the Department of Welfare six months ago, told about welfare's own work and how they have a similar form to the IT investment process for welfare investments. She suggested that it would be more efficient if their applicants could automatically involve IT in projects related to IT.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Another example of potential strengthened cooperation comes from Anne, a professional consultant for the Salary department and primary contact point for KMD, the municipality's payroll system. Anne shares a similar attitude with the IT department, wishing that employees in the organisation would be better at consulting with her before purchasing systems that fall within her area of responsibility, rather than buying the system first and then consulting with her about its implementation afterward. This attitude may be why she has a good relationship with the IT department, consulting with them well in advance.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Anne recalls an instance when she was called to a meeting by someone in the organisation, along with Jonas from the IT department, thinking that she 'might' have a stake in the implementation of their new system. She described the meeting as, "It was a video meeting, but I could sense that Jonas and I were looking at each other on the screen, thinking, 'is this really happening right now.'" This was because the third person had already purchased the system without asking and wanted it up and running in three weeks, which she found very unreasonable. She tells that such situations have at times created a tremendous workload in their wake. Thus, although Anne and Jonas work in different professional areas, they share some frustrations. A central frustration is that employees' expectations for the timeline of implementing new things do not match their own.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 During the interview, I suggested the idea of merging the systems, and Anne reacted positively to this idea, agreeing that implementing a central system that directs communication based on certain guidelines could help ensure that employees with new investments in the pipeline do not have to guess who should be involved and when in the process they should be involved.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Time requirements for new solution implementation\cb1 \
\cb3 As touched on earlier, Anne from the Salary department has grappled with some employees in the organisation who were eager to introduce new solutions, with expectations regarding the timeframe for these implementations that, in her view, were unrealistic and lacked sensitivity to the accompanying workload. At present, there are no formal guidelines laying out the expected duration for the implementation of new solutions. This void likely stems from the inherently diverse nature of IT investments, making the creation of universal guidelines a challenging task.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### The name perceived as opaque and unattractive\cb1 \
\cb3 Despite not being familiar with the IT investment process prior to our interview, Emma recalls hearing about it from Jonas, one of the IT architects, at a meeting. Emma assumed the process was primarily relevant to IT and economy personnel due to its name. She agreed that a more tangible name, such as "Indk\'f8bsguiden" (Danish for "The Purchase Guide"), might make it more accessible to the grassroots level of the organisation. However, according to Jonas, a similar system in another municipality also faced issues with lack of use, indicating a more attractive name cannot stand alone.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### IT investment process not widely promoted\cb1 \
\cb3 Interviewees such as Anne have a view of the IT investment process not being widely promoted or talked about by the personnel in the IT department. She has been used to just contacting Nicklas or one of IT's other architects when she needed something.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Broad guidelines for when reporting is required\cb1 \
\cb3 Some interviewees such as Mikkel from the Vejle's central library's IT department shared a feeling of being unsure as to when it actually was necessary to use the IT investment process, as the guidelines laid out on the Vejle's intranet cover a very broad area of investments. This is especially problematic for such central institutions that have the resources to implement new investments themselves without involving central IT, with an underlying feeling of participants wanting to be able to avoid using the process if it is unnecessary, despite the narrative at central IT being, if you are unsure, still use it to be safe.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Central vs decentralised\cb1 \
\cb3 S\'f8ren, responsible for purchasing IT equipment for schools, explained that, while employees of the municipality are met by the municipal intranet as the first thing when they log onto their computers, employees in schools have to specfically browse to the intranet's address and log in to get access, making an extra barrier to entry to the IT investment process for them. S\'f8ren is nevertheless hopeful that, while school employees currently don't use the IT investment process, that it would be possible to get them to use it with the appropriate training, despite the fact that IT investments aren't a part of the everyday work of school employees. S\'f8ren went on to say that he thinks it is important that passionate school teachers have the adequate freedom to purchase unique IT equipment to practice their unique styles of teaching, as he seems to view this as an important part of a healthy school system.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Peter, a care assistant who recently retired but still works at the residential care facility one day a week to help with their IT, raised concerns about the feasibility of relying on support from Vejle's central IT department in decentralised areas. He wonders what will happen to the facility when he fully retires, as they will have to rely on support from central IT, which may not be viable considering the facility's location and the fact that they operate year-round, providing constant care to residents.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Frustrations with restrictions from IT\cb1 \
\cb3 During the interviews, it became apparent that some interviewees, such as Claus, were frustrated with the limitations imposed by the IT department. Claus expressed his desire for more flexibility and autonomy in updating programs on his computer without having to consult with central IT. Additionally, Claus hoped for more collaboration between S\'f8ren from school IT and central IT, as these areas are becoming increasingly interconnected.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Another interviewee, Peter, expressed frustration with the lack of flexibility in smartphone models available. He believed that investing in the phones recommended by the supplier of their systems would be more beneficial, as they come with a guarantee of receiving updates for up to eight years after purchase. However, IT disagreed with his reasoning, claiming that he was influenced by the supplier. Peter's argument was that the phones offered by the IT department had to be replaced after a shorter lifespan due to not receiving necessary security updates from the manufacturer.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Importance of IT architects as communicators\cb1 \
\cb3 Many interviewees, such as S\'f8ren from school IT, acknowledged the importance of IT architects as communicators. S\'f8ren notes that the arrival of IT architects in the organisation has improved communication and collaboration between central IT and decentralised areas, as well as between IT and the rest of the organisation.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Claus went so far as to call the IT architects a "godsend," giving IT a more service-oriented outward face. Freja touched on that IT, through the years, has attained a greater range of skills than were available before, both in technical expertise but also particularly in the area of soft skills such as communication, nodding to the hiring of IT architects within the past five to ten years.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 The architects, including Mathilde, have reached out more to decentralised areas in an attempt to build better relationships. Both S\'f8ren and Mikkel mentioned Mathilde's joint meetings, describing them as very helpful in the process of making IT's work more accessible throughout the organisation.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 ### Current wins for the IT investment process\cb1 \
\cb3 While the interview data yielded a fair deal of critique to the process, it is not all bad. The web manager Freja expressed that, in her experience, that she thinks people have become more aware of the need to avoid double investments through the years. S\'f8ren from school IT described the simplification the IT investment process underwent some years ago as a considerable improvement, taking more consideration for decentralised employees.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Keeping this interview data in mind, expand and adjust this section:\cb1 \
\
\cb3 #### In-Depth Exploration of IT Investment Process through Ethnomethodology\cb1 \
\cb3 Drawing from the ethnographic approach that was undertaken in the current research, there are clear opportunities for further exploration, especially employing an EM approach.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Future research can aim to delve deeper into the nuanced practices and interactions that constitute the IT investment processes. The daily workings of IT architects, as well as their decision-making processes, can be the focus of such studies. EM techniques, such as video analysis or conversational analysis, would be extremely useful for this purpose. This approach will help uncover not only the explicit knowledge that IT architects use when making IT investment decisions but also tacit knowledge and practices, which are often overlooked but are critical to the process and which potentially could benefit from being explicated.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Moreover, breaching experiments, another EM method, could provide valuable insights into the inherent assumptions and norms within the IT department and the larger organisation. These experiments involve intentionally breaking the "rules" of social behaviour to reveal underlying norms and expectations. In an IT investment context, this might involve changing certain standard procedures or channels of communication and observing how IT architects and other stakeholders react and adapt to these changes.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 In addition, a more detailed study of the social interactions and meaning-making processes associated with IT investments could be beneficial. For instance, how do different stakeholders negotiate and collaborate during the IT investment process? What kinds of informal communication and collaboration channels exist? And how do these processes influence IT investment decisions?\cb1 \
\
\cb3 Finally, more research could be done on how sociocultural factors impact the IT investment process. The EM approach could be particularly effective in uncovering these influences, as it emphasises the importance of social context in shaping behaviors and actions.\cb1 \
\
\cb3 In summary, the current research has laid the groundwork for a more detailed exploration of the IT investment process. Future studies that incorporate EM methods could build on this foundation, providing a more holistic and in-depth understanding of the complex social dynamics that underlie IT investments. These studies could in turn inform more effective strategies and interventions for improving IT investment processes within municipalities and other organisational contexts.}